Constitution On Demand provides a convenient pocket reference of the complete text of the Constitution, Amendments to the Constitution (Including the Bill of Rights), the Virginia Statute of Religious Freedom, and the Virginia Declaration of Rights.  Also included, are a selection of the most significant Supreme Court cases.  I have created this free handy reference as an easy way to study and discuss our rights under US law.  It is my hope that by providing this guide that it will stimulate open discussions of our Constitution that lead to a true understanding of our rights as US citizens.  In the words of Thomas Jefferson, “If a nation expects to be ignorant and free, in a state of civilization, it expects what never was and never will be.

Constitution:  To the greatest extent possible, the spelling and punctuation of the original Constitution has been preserved.  Sections of the Constitution that have be revised by amendments are shown in light blue and the original text is enclosed in brackets. Each of the revised sections is followed by a note that identifies the applicable amendment.  The creation and ratification of the Constitution faced significant hurdles, not the least of these was the significant divide in economic interests that existed between the industrial north and agrarian south.  Leaders from the south like Thomas Jefferson and George Washington garnered their wealth from crops raised by African slaves. Jefferson in particular, believed that the success of the United States must spring from an agrarian economy and that a powerful federal government posed a threat to that economy. By favoring state rights over federal rights, Jefferson and Washington believed that the ownership of slaves would continue and the success of the country would be assured.  But, at the time of the drafting of the Constitution, workers to harvest the boundless resources of the Americas were in very short supply. It was only with the importation of slaves from Africa that the United States agrarian economy in the south truly began to flourish. In contrast, the economy of the northern United States did not need to rely on farming and was able to focus on manufacturing because of readily available sources of water power. With naturally occurring sources of power for their factories, owners did not need a large labor force to be profitable. Thus, the United States and its Constitution was conceived to unite states that shared opposing views of slavery. The country was divided roughly into an equal number of slave and free states and a balance of power prevailed in the government throughout the 18th and half of the 19th century.

Bill Of Rights & Other Amendments:  The United States Bill of Rights comprises the first 10 Amendments to the Constitution.  The Bill of Rights as an amendment to the constitution was proposed to address the objections raised by Anti-Federalists during the bitter debate over the ratification of the Constitution.  Ratification of the Constitution was achieved through a grand compromise in which the most contentious articles of the Constitution were removed and placed in the Bill of Rights which would then be subject to separate ratification by the states.  On September 13, 1788, the Constitution had been ratified by more than enough states and became the framework for new government.  It was not until September 25, 1789 that the newly formed Congress approved twelve articles of amendment and submitted them to the States for ratification.  Articles Three through Twelve were ratified by the states on December 15, 1791 and became Amendments One through Ten of the Constitution.  When reading the Constitution and it's associated Amendments, it should be noted that the Amendments are not a direct replacement for Articles of the Constitution.  Amendments modify and add to the Constitution, and as such, must be considered together with the applicable portions of the Constitution.  In this guide, the amended portions of the Constitution have been highlighted and an annotation of the applicable amendment has been added.

Court Rulings & Opinions:  A selection of the most influential Supreme Court Rulings has been included in this guide.  Supreme Court Rulings are very lengthy opinions of the court and an effort has been made to summarize the opinions.  Selected portions of the opinions have been included so that some of the actual text is made available in the guide.

Virginia Statues:  The Virginia Declaration of Rights and Virginia Statute of Religious Freedom have been included in this guide because of their historical importance and influence on the Constitution and Bill of Rights.  The Virginia Declaration of Rights is considered the first legislation to call for a free press and greatly influenced the Bill of Rights.  Similarly, the Virginia Statute of Religious Freedom introduced the concept of separation of church and state and the concept of freedom of conscience, both concepts influenced the concept of freedom of religion found in the 1st Amendment to the constitution.